


Network Working Group                                  K. Khandwala, Ed.
Request for Comments: 1                   JHU Network Security Fall 2018
Category: Standards Track                                 September 2018


                    Playground Request For Comments

Abstract

   The PLAYGROUND (Poly-Localized Algorithmic Yields Generated Remotely
   On Unused Network Devices) system is designed to give students and
   researchers a sandbox in which to develop network security
   experiments.  For PLAYGROUND experiments that involve a PETF
   (Playground Engineering Task Force), PRFC's (Playground RFC's) are
   used in a manner similar to RFC's.  This PRFC specifices the format
   standards for PRFC's.

Status of this Memo

   This document specifies a Playgrounds standards track protocol for
   the Playground Experiment, and requests discussion and suggestions
   for improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 SETH JAMES NIELSON.  All rights reserved.

   This document is used solely for educational purposes.  Any citations
   within this document are also for educational purposes and also for
   technical reference.  If any of these cited elements are protected
   under copyright, their inclusion here falls under Fair Use
   provisions.



















Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 1]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  General Authoring Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Meta Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Copyright Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Guidelines for Writing Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Guidelines for Writing Non-Standards . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  PRFC Submission Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  PRFC Revision Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Purpose/Technical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Protocol Specifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.1.  Session Establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.2.  Session Termination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.3.  Data Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.4.  Error Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.5.  Packet Descriptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.6.  Computational Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.7.  State Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13



























Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 2]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


1.  Introduction

   RFC's (Request for Comments) are a publication of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF).  RFC's have many purposes including
   the publication of standards, general information, and best
   practices.

   The PLAYGROUND experiment, developed by Seth James Nielson, is a
   pedigogical framework for instructing principles of Internet
   Security.  The primary goal of the PLAYGROUND framework is to provide
   a network system that allows students and researchers to develop
   security mechanisms as well as attacks against them.  The PLAYGROUND
   system is designed to provide a complex enough system to enable kinds
   of attacks and defenses one finds in the real Internet but with a
   much reduced complexity.

   Not only does PLAYGROUND provide a reduced complexity, but it also
   allows a student to think in terms of principles instead of just in
   raw implementation.  Cross-site scripting attacks may disappear in
   the future, but the principles of colliding security spaces will not.
   PLAYGROUND allows the students to try out principles in a new
   environment and with new concrete instantiations.

   Standards and other publications, such as RFC's, are a critical part
   of the security process.  Open standards allow design flaws to be
   captured early in the development of an Internet protocol or system.
   Discovered flaws can be reported and fixed quickly and effectively.

   Accordingly, as part of the PLAYGROUND experiment, collaborating
   participants, such as the students in a class, can practice and
   experiment with a publication process similar to RFC's.  These
   publications are called Playground RFC's and follow the same formats
   and serve the same purposes insofar as possible.

   This memo describes the PRFC standards, largely pointing to the
   corresponding standards for RFCs.  Differences, where they exist, are
   noted.  Also included is a description of a modified xml2rfc tool
   that can help to produce PRFC's with the proper formatting.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].







Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 3]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


2.  General Authoring Guidelines

   The most important aspect of a PRFC is the clarity and correctness of
   the writing.  The next most important component is the completeness
   of the technical document in describing all relevant information.
   The last and least important element is the formatting according to
   RFC guidelines.

   In terms of writing clearly and correctly, consider the following
   suggestions.

   1.  Use formal English grammar and use it correctly

   2.  Prefer conciseness and simplicity

   3.  Get to the point

   Although the formatting is the least important element, authors
   SHOULD learn and employ the correct formatting as much as possible.
   Most of this document will focus on these elements

   Authors MUST, after reading this PRFC, review any RFC's that are
   referenced.  Authors SHOULD search for other RFC's that provide RFC-
   authoring guidelines or instructions as well as for other RFC-
   authoring guides and tutorials that can be found on the Internet.

   Astute readers will observe that this document is also not perfectly
   aligned with RFC standards and even technical writing guidelines.
   Similarly, it is not expected that other PRFC's will be perfect
   either.  Nevertheless, authors MUST make good-faith efforts to
   understand the principles behind RFC documents and demonstrate them
   in crafting their own PRFC's.

2.1.  Meta Data

   At the top of all PRFC's is meta-data analogous to the meta-data at
   the top of an RFC.

   o  The PRFC SHOULD include the author's name.

   o  The PRFC MUST identify "JHU Network Security Fall 2018" as the
      organization

   o  The PRFC MUST NOT identify a student's actual address.  Use,
      instead, a John Hopkins office number or laboratory name.

   o  The PRFC MUST identify the month and year of writing.




Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 4]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


   Additional meta data includes the "References" and "Author's Address"
   sections.  These elements MUST conform to RFC specifications.

2.2.  Copyright Information

   The PLAYGROUND experiment is still new and has not yet developed a
   policy that has been reviewed by legal counsel.  However, at present,
   the following text MUST be used in the PRFC's.

   The copyright notice on the front page of the PRFC should read:
   "Copyright (c) 2018 SETH JAMES NIELSON.  All rights reserved.

   This document is used solely for educational purposes.  Any citations
   within this document are also for educational purposes and also for
   technical reference.  If any of these cited elements are protected
   under copyright, their inclusion here falls under Fair Use
   provisions."

   Student authors MUST grant copyrights to SETH JAMES NIELSON.
   However, they may also retain copyrights for themselves and add their
   names to the copyright notice accordingly.

   The final page of the PRFC MUST include a section entitled "Full
   Copyright Statement" that reads:

   "Copyright (C) Seth James Nielson (2018).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the PLAYGROUND experiment or
   other associated organizations, except by explicit permission.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by SETH JAMES NIELSON or his successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and SETH JAMES NIELSON and associated academic
   institutions DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

   After the "Full Copyright Statement" the PRFC MUST include a section



Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 5]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


   entitled "Intellectual Property" that reads:

   The PLAYGROUND framework and student submissions for PLAYGROUND are
   intended to be free of any intellectual property conflicts.  All
   submitting parties, especially students, are not allowed to submit
   source code, specifications, or other components that are known to be
   protected by copyright, patents, or other IP mechanisms.  Students
   submitting creative content grant shared rights and ownership of
   their content to the PLAYGROUND project.  Specifically, any
   submission can be used in future educational settings including
   subsequent PLAYGROUND experiments.

   Any interested party is invited to bring to the experiment director's
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be currently
   in use without permission.

   It should be noted that these statements have not been reviewed by
   legal counsel.  Moreover, the academic institutions at which
   PLAYGROUND experiments take place may have additional or even
   conflicting copyright and intellectual property rules.  Accordingly,
   concerned parties may need to contact their own lawyer and/or
   resources at their institution to understand the rights and
   limitations associated with code donated to a PLAYGROUND experiment."

   As with the initial copyright notice, the Copyright assignment to
   Seth James Nielson can be agumented the the names of the authors.

2.3.  Guidelines for Writing Standards

   Most of the guidelines for writing standards are the same as they are
   for RFC's.  In particular, RFC 2360 [RFC2360] provides the current
   best practices for writing Internet Standards.  In general, RFC 2360
   will provide the basic template for evaluating PRFC's that specify a
   standard.

   Perhaps the most important section of RFC 2360 is "2.1 Discussion of
   Security."  Authors MUST read and understand this information.
   PRFC's without an adequate discussion of security will be rejected.

   Certain sections of RFC 2360 do not apply to writing PRFC's.  These
   include:

      2.5 Change Logs

      2.13 IANA Considerations





Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 6]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


      2.14 Network Management Considerations

      2.17 Internationalization

   For PRFC's that will serve as standards, the status MUST read: " This
   document specifies a Playgrounds standards track protocol for the
   Playground Experiment, and requests discussion and suggestions for
   improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited."

2.4.  Guidelines for Writing Non-Standards

   PRFC's that are not standards track will not be held to the same
   requirements.  In particular, while it would be great if these PRFC's
   tracked RFC guidelines, it is not required.

   For documents that comprise "best current practices," the status of
   the PRFC MUST read: "This document specifies an Playground Best
   Current Practices for the Playground Experiment, and requests
   discussion and suggestions for improvements.  Distribution of this
   memo is unlimited."

   For documents that are for information purposes only, the status of
   the PRFC MUST read: "This memo provides information for the
   Playground Experiment.  It does not specify an Playground standard of
   any kind.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited."

   For documents that specify experimental protocols, the status of the
   PRFC MUST read: "This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the
   Playground Experiment.  It does not specify a Playground standard of
   any kind.  Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited."

   For documents that specify information that is kept for historical
   reasons the status of the PRFC must read: "This memo describes a
   historic protocol for the Playground Experiment.  It does not specify
   a Playground standard of any kind.  Distribution of this memo is
   unlimited."


3.  PRFC Submission Process

   PRFC's are required whenever PLAYGROUND groups need to interoperate.
   Some specifications will be mandated as part of PLAYGROUND
   development.  Under these circumstances, the PETF will be responsible
   for approving the standards.

   In creating these mandated standards, the PETF can either draft the
   standards and a reference implementation themselves or accept



Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 7]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


   submissions from individual groups.  In either case, the final
   standard must be approved by a majority of the PETF before the PRFC
   will be officially published.

   Any group can draft a standard that defines protocols and
   technologies that are specific to their own PLAYGROUND nodes.
   Publishing PRFC's is the only acceptable way for two groups to
   interact with each other.  Thus, if a group wishes to make their
   optional mechanisms available to other groups, they must create a
   PRFC publication.  These PRFC's do not need the approval of the PETF
   if they are given "experimental" status.  Otherwise, a majority of
   the PETF must approve the standard in order for it to be given
   "standards-track" status.

   PRFC's seeking "informational" status also do not require PETF
   approval.

   PRFC's seeking "best current practice" status do require PETF
   approval.


4.  PRFC Revision Process

   Once a PRFC is officially published by the PETF, it cannot be
   modified further for any reason.  A new PRFC must be submitted that
   identifies the errors and proposes to "update" or "supercede" the
   previous document.

   A PRFC MUST use the "update" reference if the changes do not result
   in an incompatible protocol and the old protocol is not shown to be
   insecure.  Changes to PRFC's that are "updates" include:

   1.  Corrections to spelling, grammar, and other wording in the
       document

   2.  Additional details about operations and operational
       considerations

   3.  Additional parameters or interactions to the existing protocol

   A PRFC MUST use the "supercede" reference if the changes result in an
   incompatible protocol OR if the previous protocol is demonstrated to
   be insecure.

   Approval from the PETF MUST be obtained if approval was required for
   the original PRFC.

   A PRFC submitted without PETF approval MUST be revised only by the



Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 8]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


   same PLAYGROUND group that submitted the original.


5.  Security Considerations

   This specification is a documentation standard and not directly
   related to the technical security of any protocol.


6.  Purpose/Technical Background

   The protocol will be named as Reliable Internetwork Playground
   Protocol (R.I.P.P)


7.  Protocol Specifications

7.1.  Session Establishment

   RIPP protocol consists of a unique Playground IP Address (PIP) which
   will uniquely identify the machine connected to the Playground
   network.  RIPP also has port identifiers built in to identify and
   handle multiplexing and demultiplexing which can handle multiple
   separate data streams.

   RIPP performs a "three-way handshake" which establishes the session
   between the communicating entities which is followed by data
   transmission.  Establishing a session is essential before any
   transmission of payload can occur.  Similarly, no data can be
   transferred after the session has been terminated.  There is no
   restriction on who can establish a connection.  It can be initiated
   by either party in the communication channel.  Once an entity
   initiates the connection, the other party should respond with an
   acknowledgment.

   A simple "three-way handshake" is shown in figure 1 below.  The
   figure shows 2 parties RIPP A and RIPP B performing the handshake.
   In this scenario, RIPP A initiates the connection and RIPP B is
   responding to the handshake.  RIPP A sends a SYN packet indicating
   that it will use a certain sequence number.  RIPP B send back a SYN
   and acknowledges the SYN it received from RIPP A. The ACK sent by
   RIPP B states that it is expecting to hear sequence which follows the
   previous sequence number, acknowledging the earlier SYN.  RIPP A
   responds with an empty ACK and then starts sending data from the next
   stage.






Khandwala                    Standards Track                    [Page 9]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


      RIPP A                                                 RIPP B

  1.  CLOSED                                                LISTEN

  2.  SYN-SENT    -->     (SEQ=100)(CTL=SYN)            --> SYN-RECEIVED

  3.  ESTABLISHED --> (SEQ=300)(ACK=101)(CTL=SYN,ACK)   <-- SYN-RECEIVED

  4.  ESTABLISHED -->  (SEQ=101)(ACK=301)(CTL=ACK)      --> ESTABLISHED

  5.  ESTABLISHED --> (SEQ=101)(ACK=301)(CTL=ACK)(DATA) --> ESTABLISHED

    Figure 1: Basic 3-Way Handshake for Connection Synchronization



   The sequence number of the SYN packet can be based on any number
   generation system but should be different for all the SYN packets
   sent out.  No two connections should have the same sequence number.
   Further, RIPP B does not need to ACK every SYN packet sent to it.

7.2.  Session Termination

   The RIPP protocol specific a set of exchanges required to gracefully
   shut down the connection between communicating entities.  The "four-
   way handshake" process is used for correctly terminating the
   connection.  The first step for terminating the connection is to send
   a FIN packet to the other client.  There is no restriction on who can
   initiate the FIN request; any one of the communicating parties can
   send it to the other one.  Once the other party receives the FIN
   request, it should send back a FIN-ACK packet to acknowledge the RIP
   packet.  Once the acknowledgement is sent out, the data packets left
   in the buffer are cleared out and an acknowledgment for them is
   awaited.  When the sender receiver the ACK for all the packets, it
   sends out a FIN message and waits for a FIN-ACK from the other party.
   The connection can then close gracefully after the FIN-ACK packet is
   sent out.

   A simple version of the above "four-way handshake" to terminate the
   connection is shown below in figure 2.











Khandwala                    Standards Track                   [Page 10]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


       RIPP A                                                 RIPP B

   1.  ESTABLISHED                                          ESTABLISHED

   2.  (Close)
                  --> <SEQ=100><ACK=300><CTL=FIN,ACK>  -->

   3.             <-- <SEQ=300><ACK=101><CTL=ACK>      <--
                                                           Clear Buffer
   4.                                                       (Close)
                  <-- <SEQ=300><ACK=101><CTL=FIN,ACK>  <--

   5.             --> <SEQ=101><ACK=301><CTL=ACK>      -->

   6.  CLOSED

     Figure 2: Basic 4-Way Handshake for Connection Termination



7.3.  Data Transmission

   After the connection has been established, the sender and receiver
   can send packets of data to each other and continue communicating
   with each other.  The way that data flows between these two entities
   can be percieved as a stream oriented transfer of data.  The RIPP
   protocol sends chunks of bytes from the sender to the receiver.  The
   RIPP protocol has a maximum payload size of 2048 bytes.  In case the
   payload is greater than 2048, the RIPP protocol should break it down
   into chunks of 2048 bytes.  The data in the payload recevied by the
   RIPP protocol needs to be encapsulated into a Buffer.

   On the client side, the SEQ Number header field for the first data
   packet sent is set equal to the SEQ number of the ACK packet sent
   during the RIPP handshake.  For subsequent data packets, the SEQ
   number is determined by adding the sequence number of the previous
   packet with the length of the previous packet.  On the server side,
   the first data packet sent has the sequence number of the SYN-ACK
   packet sent during the handshake.  And similarly, for the subsequent
   packets, the sequence number is determined by adding the sequence
   number and length of the previous packet.

7.4.  Error Handling

   Approval from the PETF MUST be obtained if approval was required for
   the original PRFC.





Khandwala                    Standards Track                   [Page 11]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


7.5.  Packet Descriptions

   Approval from the PETF MUST be obtained if approval was required for
   the original PRFC.

7.6.  Computational Algorithms

   Approval from the PETF MUST be obtained if approval was required for
   the original PRFC.

7.7.  State Machines

   Approval from the PETF MUST be obtained if approval was required for
   the original PRFC.


8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2360]  Scott, G., "Guide for Internet Standards Writers", BCP 22,
              RFC 2360, DOI 10.17487/RFC2360, June 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2360>.


Author's Address

   Kandarp Khandwala (editor)
   JHU Network Security Fall 2018
   JHU 160 Malone Hall/3400 North Charles St.
   Baltimore, MD  21218
   USA

   Phone: +1 443-763-9251
   Email: kck@jhu.edu













Khandwala                    Standards Track                   [Page 12]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) Seth James Nielson (2018).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the PLAYGROUND experiment or
   other associated organizations, except by explicit permission.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by SETH JAMES NIELSON or his successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and SETH JAMES NIELSON and associated academic
   institutions DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The PLAYGROUND framework and student submissions for PLAYGROUND are
   intended to be free of any intellectual property conflicts.  All
   submitting parties, especially students, are not allowed to submit
   source code, specifications, or other components that are known to be
   protected by copyright, patents, or other IP mechanisms.  Students
   submitting creative content grant shared rights and ownership of
   their content to the PLAYGROUND project.  Specifically, any
   submission can be used in future educational settings including
   subsequent PLAYGROUND experiments.

   Any interested party is invited to bring to the experiment director's
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be currently
   in use without permission.

   It should be noted that these statements have not been reviewed by
   legal counsel.  Moreover, the academic institutions at which
   PLAYGROUND experiments take place may have additional or even
   conflicting copyright and intellectual property rules.  Accordingly,
   concerned parties may need to contact their own lawyer and/or
   resources at their institution to understand the rights and



Khandwala                    Standards Track                   [Page 13]

RFC 1                            PRFC's                   September 2018


   limitations associated with code donated to a PLAYGROUND experiment.


















































Khandwala                    Standards Track                   [Page 14]

